okay so now we get the quote from rand
and the quote from randy's quote thus
the process of forming and applying
concepts contains the essential pattern
of two fundamental methods of cognition
induction and deduction the process of
observing the facts of reality and of
integrating them into concepts is in
essence a process of induction
so let's just repeat that let's just
keep that in mind this is what rand is
saying the process of
observing the facts of reality
and of integrating them into concepts is
in essence a process of induction so
that's what she thinks she thinks is a
process of of observing the facts of
reality of observing the facts of
reality observing i know i'm laboring
this point but i'm presuming at least
some objectivists will be listening to
this what a popularity would say what i
would say is that that claim is just a
fundamental misunderstanding of how
concept formation as you're calling it
occurs there's no process of observing
the facts of reality let's consider an
example consider observing stars what
you see at night are cold dim tiny
pinpricks of light for eons our
ancestors used their senses to observe
those facts of reality but those
observations got them not one jot closer
to reality reality so far as we know it
always partially always imperfectly
consists of stars but they're not cold
they're hot they're not dim they're
bright they're not tiny they're vast you
don't get that by observation
observation of the kind you're talking
about gives you an entirely misleading
picture of reality popper explained what
we do has nothing to do with that kind
of observation instead first we
conjecture explanations we begin with
our guesses
about reality we're walking around with
knowledge already then we use those
observations to check those explanations
against reality observations are crucial
i'm not saying observations aren't
important for the generation of
knowledge i'm just saying you can't
derive the knowledge from your
observations so the process is nothing
like rand imagines moreover we never get
the facts of reality what does that mean
the facts of reality the facts of
reality that's the domain of ontology
what is true in terms of actual reality
but we only have access to ontology to
to ultimate reality to the facts of
reality via an epistemological process
the construction of knowledge and the
construction of knowledge merely
represents our best understanding of
reality understanding the truth of
reality we're representing that we're
not getting to it it's it's confusing
our understanding of the thing with the
thing in itself and our understanding is
always error-prone open to
interpretation and improvement in fact
that's how progress occurs we begin with
errors with problems and only by
correcting those errors finding
solutions do we make progress the actual
process of concept formation knowledge
creation is about observing yes but not
observing the facts of reality it's
about observing scant bits of evidence
little bits of light we guess coming
from the sky we guess now we try to
understand we could be deceived or
simply an error after all the ancients
thought that the little bits of light
were coming from not this thing the sky
they were coming from the celestial
sphere there were holes in the celestial
sphere coming from a uniform light
source further off
we try to understand but we could always
be deceived or an error it's it's a long
chain of further guesses and careful
checks by putting things actually
between us and the stars glass tubes and
computers the telescopes and instruments
of astronomy they bring us somewhat
closer to reality but never at it never
to it never had a final explanation
never to the facts of reality we just
refine and improve our knowledge and
eventually after lots of work in this
case millennia centuries decades in
terms of astronomy we gradually
gradually accumulate better ideas by
correcting our errors but it was just a
process of observing the facts of
reality we'd just look up and see
burning hot furnaces of nuclear fusion
and the coreospherical objects occurring
at hundreds of millions of degrees
happening many light years away but we
don't observe that we do we observe none
of those reactions in fact what we
understand tells us that it's impossible
to observe those reactions we can't
observe
those facts of reality that those
reactions in the core of the star are in
principle unobservable no instrument can
get there anything made of matter is
going to be vaporized turn to its
constituent particles it'll be unable to
send information back to us
if you don't like that example consider
dinosaurs no one's ever going to observe
a dinosaur the facts of reality about
dinosaurs what they're going to observe
david deutsch uses this wonderful
example instance of this you observe
rocks some rocks have strange patterns
in them these patterns are things called
fossils
to some people most of us now they look
like animals of a sort but nothing that
walks the earth and what are they it
took decades centuries in fact to figure
out what the heck these things are how
old these rocks were how old these
fossils were we interpret stuff we
eventually build up this story called an
explanation a scientific explanation of
fossils and that scientific explanation
invokes these things called dinosaurs
something we we don't observe we don't
observe dinosaurs we observe rocks again
yeah there are movies like jurassic park
where they they show you these dinosaurs
running around but no one's ever seen
that in real life it's fiction what was
it really like back then well we've got
some ideas from scant evidence bits of
rock
taken from deep under the earth we're
not observing those facts of reality
we're guessing this explanation and once
we've guessed it we go out and we
compare our guests to further
observations we make but every time we
dig up a new fossil we often get new
problems this one doesn't make sense why
is this one in this strata not that
strata it seems too old or too young
what's going on here we thought these
things were like lizards and they should
have been cold blooded but now they've
got feathers they're more like birds
what is going on there's so many
problems with dinosaurs the theory of
dinosaurs not that they didn't exist but
we don't understand it because we can't
just observe the facts of reality if we
could
then everyone would understand dinosaurs
unproblematically we don't
we don't observe the facts of reality
rand is simply
categorically wrong about this
we interpret little bits of evidence and
gradually build up knowledge about
reality the so-called facts of reality
come at the end of this story they are
logical derivations of the explanations
where the explanations come from the
explanations come from problems we
encounter that require us to conjecture
them and then test them using
observations
if we don't have a problem then we don't
have we already have knowledge and then
the question is well how did we get that
knowledge that we're already walking
around with unproblematically so to
speak well you've got to go back to a
time when you did have a problem okay
and why did you have that problem
because well you had that problem
because some of the knowledge you were
walking around with at that time didn't
seem to fit with what you just observed
you encountered a problem what do you
mean that knowledge didn't fit with the
observation you make where did you get
that knowledge and so it keeps on going
back and back and back but you always
start with this knowledge right you're
walking around this knowledge then it's
a problem then knowledge and problem the
knowledge the problem you're not going
from the observation and putting the
knowledge into your head that's like the
bucket theory of knowledge you're just
filling your head with observations that
are giving you reality it's a very
mystical idea it's like divine
inspiration or something it's false now
rand who is obviously an uh an avowed
atheist rejected supernaturalism but
this is a
supernatural epistemology it's saying
that via some magical process the
knowledge is there in reality and you
just have to have it transmitted to your
brain but how
how is this concept formation done well
it's done inside of your mind by
conjecture
so this idea
that we have this process of observing
the facts of reality and integrating
them into concepts and that is the
process of induction conflates actually
the error of empiricism that we observe
reality or the facts of reality and
that other process of the same name
induction traditionally always used to
label a process of moving from singular
instances to universal laws everyone
knew that couldn't work it was a problem
it was shown it couldn't work it was
strictly illogical and popper solved it
all by saying look you've got to accept
the fact it doesn't work it simply
doesn't exist as a process it's not
valid so it's not a thing so therefore
knowledge can't use it give up on it do
away with it we can discard it
deduction's a thing but not induction
you don't have to try and ape what's
going on in mathematics mathematics
produces mathematical knowledge you
begin with the axioms you follow the
rules of inference you get to your
conclusions or theorems very well that's
mathematics all right now we're talking
science and other stuff
if you want to say well it's got to work
the same way
you've got to start with
something like observations they're
axioms and then you go through some
process of concept formation we'll call
it and then you get your knowledge
you're trying to
shoehorn a mathematical process into
science into some other kind of area
where we don't have axioms to begin with
the whole problem with that by the way
is that you don't know the axioms are
true in mathematics anyway proof is not
strictly speaking a method of generating
mathematical knowledge it's a it's a
it's a computation you do to show that
theorems follow from particular premises
i guess you could call that knowledge
but it's very narrow kind of a thing
so papa just said look knowledge doesn't
begin in observation it begins in
problems from there you make guesses
about reality and you check those
against reality and all of that process
checking occurs out there in the
objective real world it's not a
parochial subject activity of minds